My mother was born
in Des Moines, Iowa. I shouldn't give
you the date, but it was May 12, 1907. My mother was
born in 1907. And then, I'll skip it, I went to Iowa
State, took chemical engineering, and
graduated. When you got to Iowa State, in uh 1927 or
something like that 25 uh was was the chemical
engineering department independent or with
chemistry or do you remember okay it was
independent it had done well it had become
independent before i was there okay the head of
department
uh dr o.r sweeney was
quite a person. He looked like Edison. He looked
impeccable. And he had
separated. We had a separate building. We did use
some of the chemistry department basement. and
they were in the chemistry department basement
for a couple of years, several years before I was
there, and they were in the chemistry department
before they got to Quillip. Yeah. And, uh, they,
uh, well... What were chem, chemical engineers in
Iowa doing at that time when you were in school?
Well, they, they didn't, they went, a lot of them
went out of Iowa, but The companies that hired them
were Quaker Oats, and there were a few other
industries that hired them in Iowa. I just
wondered, they got a food processing oriented in
Iowa? Yes. He was interested in solid extraction.
Milling? Mainly, before that, he was interested
in paper making using straw and corn stalks. Okay,
yeah. And they built, as part of his research, they
built a plant to make wallboard, fiberboard out of
corn stalks. And also, a solvent extraction plant
was built to extract the oil, soybean oil. And both
of them stopped economics. The 29 Depression made
paper so cheap that they couldn't afford to make
this all the way out of lunchbox. So they made it out
of And then the solvent extraction plant, they had
planned
to use ethylene bicarbide as a solvent, and it
turned out to be bad. The poisoned cattle, the
original and the
poisoned indigo paddlers had restoration. that
plant shut down. Then there were... Do you have an
interesting idea in the paper making? I don't
guess that's done anywhere now. Is it out of corn
stalk material?
I don't think they used corn stalks much. They
couldn't?
Well, they had then when I was there, they had a
Department of Agricultural Research lab there,
too, as part of it. And they experimented with
fermentation of corn stalks and
other things, and distillation. They ran that at a
big still, and they ran I dumped in there and got
charcoal out and residues and stuff. What had
gotten you interested in chemical engineering in
the first place, do you know? No, I don't exactly. I
was more interested in electrical engineering.
And I got to talking with someone who said that
chemical engineering would have a bigger field.
So I just switched over. That's the way we do
things.
So you finished then? I finished my BS in 29. And
that was as the depression was starting and it was
hard to get a job. So I got a job as a chemist at the Des
Moines Water Company. I spent a year there, but it
was not chemical engineering, it was mostly
chemistry. So I went back up to Iowa State and Dr.
Sweeney offered me a graduate assistant in
teaching.
I was going to get out with a master's degree, but it
was still very, very bad. No jobs available. And so
I stayed on and got my PhD. Oh, you did? OK. And I will
stay. And taught. And taught part-time. Yeah, I
taught all four years. Assistive teaching,
mostly in laboratory. And I assisted Dr. Sweeney
in his first book, Walker Lewis McAdams. I don't
know whether you've ever seen it. No. That was the
first real book in chemical engineering. Is that
right? Yes. It had the unit operations. Yeah,
okay. And the methods of handling it. And it was a
very good book. Do you have a copy of that?
I may not have. I'll look in the library. It's
McAdams, Walker, and McAdams. They really
initiated chemical engineering in this country.
MIT. Okay, yes. I've seen references.
I probably should look at that, because I'm
familiar with that story. And the next one we used,
I guess, was Badger and Banker. It wasn't much of
a difference. I'll look at those. That's a good
idea. A key period. So you got your PhD. What year
was that? That was in 34. And that was the very
bottom of the depression. That was the year I was
born. Memorable. So I took college
jobs, one of which air conditioning was coming
along, and I got a job working with a fellow who
installed air conditioning, and I contracted to
install a little of it. In Des Moines? In Des
Moines, yeah. I went to Chicago, everything in
Chicago was
shut down. Yeah. And I was married to my mom, got
married in 31. And my wife had a job. She worked for
an insurance
company. We had a firm for that time. That's right.
If you were employed, you were doing pretty good.
Yeah. I
said, if you were employed, you were doing pretty
good. Yes, you were doing all right. And she went
for an
internship, automobile industry. And so in
summer of 35,
I went back up to Iowa State and he
told me about this job down here. And so I wrote down
and he sent a recommendation and I got a job offer.
Now one reason they were expanding down
here, the enrollment was jumping and they didn't
have enough
people to teach. So, I don't know whether it jumped
away from Iowa State or not, but there's not much
more I can say up there. My thesis there was on
plastics,
polymer. Oh, okay. So, did you take the job down
at... I took the job down here at A&E. Okay. And you
might say I've been here all ever since. In 35, fall
of 35, I came here. Now when you came, did you go into
the chemistry department? Yes, we were still a
part of chemistry. It was under chemistry. Yeah,
chemistry and chemical engineering. Yeah. And
Hedges, C.C. Hedges. C.C. Hedges was the head of
the department. But he was not a chemical
engineer. No, yeah. And he wasn't much interested
in research, and I was, and some of the other new
people that came in were interested.
And at the time, the fellow that started Timothy
Gleason right here was called Duke Thorne, M.K.
Thorne. And I really took his job.
Apparently he didn't care too much about teaching
chemistry and playing with hedges. So he went in
the, I think he went in the agricultural
experiment station. Yeah, he did. It was the
cotton specialist. Yeah, he showed people how to
make leather and all that sort of thing. But he
started the chemical engineering and they had a,
laboratory building, I guess it was a metal
building, across from where the chemistry
department is now. Right across the street was
this chemical engineering laboratory. Now
another little thing that they were interested
in, and maybe through Duke Cotton, was fibers, the
treatment of cotton fibers and wool fibers. And
there was a
in a
separate organization which studied processing
fibers, dyeing and cleaning and all that. And
Professor Bishop, who came in just shortly after
his partner's death, he was also interested
in that. And he was from
I don't
know whether he was from New York or
Massachusetts. I'll check. He was from some
school up there. And he was interested in
papermaking because that school had been
sponsored greatly by paper companies. And so he
was interested in papermaking that idea. He
started some research on it. Interesting period.
How about petroleum? Was there much? Well, yeah.
Okay, don't let me rush you.
Tell me about, let me back up here just a minute,
because when you arrived at Texas A&M, what was
your impression of the school and teaching the
situation? Well, I didn't. Professor Hedges was
hard to get along with. Other than that, it was
okay. The people in there, I got along fine. We, uh,
Bishop and I had our own say-so in the development
of chemical engineering. Okay. So you two really
were in it? We, we started it. I started teaching
the courses that I had helped with and taught at
Iowa State. And Bishop had the unit operations
pretty well, too. And I started teaching
the first course, 204. That was the new course.
I was talking to Ron Darby the other day about it,
and I can't remember what it is. Well, he's still
teaching it. Yeah, he's teaching it now, in fact.
We used the best book that there ever was from
Haugen and Watson. And then we later resubmitted
one that was written by the University of Texas.
But Hagen and Watson was probably the best book on
that. Physical Properties. Okay. That was the
course, wasn't it? That was the course. Physical
Properties. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And then I taught design from the point of
very beginning. And my first class was 36 when I did
basic. And they did very well. And I met with them
some years back here, some of
them. All of them did excellent. Now to back to
growing. When I first came here, Everything was
pointed to petroleum because they hired all of our
students. We taught a laboratory course
in petroleum and a regular class. We had a class in
petroleum, 409 of them.
But
we were down in the basement. We distilled crude
oil and even gasoline, which was very bad, down in
the basement of the chemistry department. We had
drums, big drums of crude oil down there. And it was
not very safe. Luckily, we didn't blow it up. Then
gradually,
the new things came in. I might say that there was a
Pan American Oil, Pan Am Oil Company, a subsidiary
of Standard? Standard Oil, subsidiary. And all
they did was distill petroleum. It was the largest
one in the world at the time. And
then gradually, they began to
use petroleum byproducts as chemicals. And they
began
to make various things, like Shell. Shell
developed a plant to make glycerin. They
also had been making ethyl alcohol, and then of
course they made many other chemicals, ethylene
glycol. And now off the back, the first oil
companies were Golf, an oil company in Fort
Arthur. And
Tim
Kerr was almost as old
in Fort Arthur. And then there
was what's called the Magnolia, which became
MOVA. And then this one, Texas City, which is Van
Am or Amical, I think. And
I don't remember, but the Humboldt Oil
and Refinery was also in there at the beginning,
and that became Exxon. And then there, in Farfus
Christie, there were a couple of the Taylor Oil
Company, which had a lot of our students.
Mannington.
And they eventually sold out.
Were they Aggie-owned,
I wonder, or anything? Yes. Well, no, I don't
think. Not necessarily. I don't know. Bill Taylor
started a little refinery in East Texas. And then
he moved down. They moved and built a refinery down
in Corpus Christi. And also another small one. at,
what's the name of the part of the big resort is it?
Port Isabel. Port Isabel. Port Isabel. Port
Isabel was the refinery that was the Port Isabel.
And it was a small refinery, but they would And then
there
were one or more other refineries in Corpus. And I
don't remember the name of them.
Didn't have much to do with it. Those refineries
then stayed on. There was another refinery right
in Houston in Pasadena. And
then
during the war, that created a lot of things. And
one of this class of mine, first class of 36,
built a good year rubber plant in Pasadena.
Who was that? Do you remember? I can't remember.
That's okay. I can't remember. You'll have to give
a list of the Class of 1936. And then he went from
there and became in charge of the government
uranium separation plant. He became manager of
it. I'll find out. That's interesting. And
another one stayed in there and went to the Air
Force as a test pilot.
And he bought the campus once and twice in a big fee.
Yeah. 29, I guess it was.
But in that class,
a lot of them went to become managers. manager of
the paper mill in east texas the manager of the one
in houston i think and they became very high in
industry yeah
and they did well that's what i heard yeah they did
very good in the mobile oil We didn't do so well with
Sinclair. There was a pure oil company, and the
manager of that was one of our students.
What else were they doing besides petroleum?
Where were your students going? The paper you
mentioned. Yes, that came along.
I don't remember. The management of Diamond
Outlaw in Pasadena
was built pretty early to make chlorine and
caustic soda. And the manager of that was one of our
students, one of my students. And when they had a
surplus of chlorine, they began wanting to use it,
so they began to make chlorinated compounds. And
in order to get
more chlorinated hydrocarbons, I guess, They
went to, uh, they bought refinery and diamond oil,
and so they become diamond shamrock. Okay. They
want shamrock. Yeah. And so then they, they began
to make, uh, mostly,
uh, vinyl fluoride as their main production. And,
uh... Dital? What kind of chloride? Vinyl
chloride, polyvinyl PVC. They sold, I don't think
they made the plastic, but they sold PVC. And I
think maybe, one way they made that, they bought
acetylene from Roman Haas.
Now, Roman
Haas was a very interesting company to me in that
its raw materials were methane and air
and
very little else. And they made
methylmethacrylate,
which
is plexiglass. What was their name? Plexiglass,
what was their name? Plexiglass, what was their
name? DuPont. Anyway, and then they went on to
other compounds, such as the constant dysplastic
compounds and all that little black thing. Their
raw materials were just So
plastics basically are beginning to come in in the
30s or earlier? No, actually
when I was working on plastics,
the only ones in production that were being made
were the urea formaldehyde discovered about that
time and before that phenol formaldehyde formica
what was the name of the guy and he wrote
a book on plastics but his book was mostly trial and
error, like anesthesia. But then, about that
time, in the trunk of the dog,
he studied the theory and figured out why polymers
were formed. And they have to have two acting
groups. Nylon
has, for example, hexadecane,
hexamethylene diamine, and adipic acid, which is
a dicompaxilic acid. So that's phenomenal. He
discovered that, and that's why
another, I beg your pardon now, another plastic
that was being made in those days, and this is what
kept the plant out of problem in the Depression,
they discovered cellophane, reconstituted
cellulose.
And so they began to make lots of cellophane
sheets. That kind of stuff really didn't come on
the market until the late 30s and 40s to look for it,
was it? That's right. They didn't even know much
about it when I graduated in 34. The only thing that
I'll show you is this.
I'll bring it
over here. Your outcome?
i made two of these i don't know that's been all from
hell to high okay and that was made i made that back
probably about 1933. did you ever
i had two of them i don't know what happened then i
think
i made them as later i tried to put some light bulbs
on them well that's very nice that's A pioneering
piece of work, I would guess. It was more or less
made by accident. I mixed the phenol and
formaldehyde and it came out that I could cast it.
And so I began to cast it and then I turned it down in a
lathe and polished it. But that was up to date then.
That was new. Yeah, I bet it was. However, they had
been making formica for some time, but they
couldn't make it white. A trace of iron makes this
red, and the phenol. They didn't have very pure
phenol, but they had a little iron in the phenol,
and it would make a color. Now the phenol,
the urea formaldehyde, could be made white, but it
was not durable.
So they got into melamine from Mount Hyde, which is
what most of these dishes are made of. Yeah.
Plastic dishes. Melamine, yes. Plastic
dishes. Now, are some of your students beginning
to move into research in the 30s and 40s? Of course,
there was wars going on. Not very many went into
research at that time. We didn't have very many
graduate students. At the time, when we were in the
chemistry building, I had one graduate student.
He was
trying to make a by-product. He had worked for a
carbon black company in West Texas. And he found it
up there that they accidentally made lots of
formaldehyde. And so he was trying to make a
by-product formaldehyde from their carbon
black,
I guess. And he did some research on formaldehyde.
Then before that, they had some research students
on cottonseed oil. Now I might better go back.
Hedges and Duke Thornton had started working with
the cotton seed
people. And they started up the cotton seed oil
short course.
And it was going when I came
here. And Bishop, more or less, took over the
supervision of that short course after Duke
Thornton went on. But Duke Thornton stayed with it
for a while. And even Dr. Hedges was very
enthusiastic about it. And, of course, they built
a building which
has been torn down to the right. adjacent to the
parkway, south of the parkway. I don't know what's
there now, but they've torn it down. Yeah, that
whole part of the campus has really changed. But
anyway,
that was under chemical engineering until one
time we got a new beam and he put it under the
engineering experimentation and brought in new
people to run it. That was the food processing, and
I forget the one that's there now. Carl Cater was
one, and there was a fellow for him that died, and I
don't know him. I've met the fellow now, and I know I
should know
him. But at that time, I went into research in
potency. Oh, you did? Solid extraction. and
build
a pilot unit over there. And it might be, I don't
know, but anyway, I use isopropyl
alcohol as a solvent. And We found that we could
remove the gossipole from cotton seed. I don't
know whether you know what that gossipole is. It's
a reddish-brown, beryllium... Under the husk?
Poisonous, but fakes. Yeah, okay. And bad for
chicken and eggs, and doesn't bother cattle. But
anyway, we could remove it.
So we designed the processing unit, and it's been
published. And in the last few years, they have
restarted that research out at Bryan Field. And
they have a fairly large pilot unit using
isopropyl alcohol. And they have developed some
improvements to take care of some of our problems
out there. That's interesting, isn't it? Coming
back, huh? I'm still a member of that committee
now. That's good. But I haven't been very active.
Yeah. Rather than the Leslie Watkins. Les Watkins
was the one that ran around with it.
What do you think would have been... In the 20s and
30s, I forget the date that chemical engineering
came on as a part of the, I've got it somewhere, but
as a part of the program in chemistry, what would
you give, say, might have been the primary
incentives to the development of a chemical
engineering program at Texas A&M in the 20s and
30s? Would it have been agriculture, cotton, oil,
or should you even say that, just all of those
things?
Petrochemicals? Well, I think oil was the thing
that started the interest in chemical
engineering. However, yes it was. The fact that
this was an agricultural college, why chemical
engineering had to become interested in
agriculture. Yeah, I kind of felt like it had a
little bit different twist here than it would in
some of the... Back up in Des Moines, if you want to
take a look out there, these squirrels come up. Oh,
water, yeah. You know, wild ones. He has been able
to get in there, but we think we've got it wired
down. He's studying that. I'll figure that out. He
can, he's just getting... She filled it up this
morning, I think. Yeah. Now,
skipping back up to Iowa, that was the same thing.
Dr. Sweeney had a department who was interested in
improving coal. The coal had as much as 3% sulfur.
And, of course, it was hard
to burn without making some of the oxides, because
the plants spit.
And in a water plant, I analyzed the coal, and it ran
up to three and a half percent sulfur. time. It was
mostly around 2%.
And that was a big problem in Bernie. And then, of
course, he became interested in the corn stalks
and the soy beans.
And that was why chemical engineering developed
in Iowa State. And a similar thing down here. They
had It was set up by another called General
Mechanical College. And the oil production and
oil companies grew and hired these people who used
the unit operations and used the chemical
processing.
And one of the other plants that was started was
sulfur. Sulfur. Sulfur Company. And of course,
they made lots of sulfuric acid. to be used in
petroleum. Petroleum here is a great deal of
sulfuric acid. And then, of course, they began to
make fertilizer. And incidentally, one of my
students had a big fertilizer plant down in
Pasadena. He was also, I believe, may have been in
the class of 36, but I'm not sure. Do you remember
his name? I'm not trying to put you on the spot.
Well, mine neither, so don't worry. Well, me too.
When I want them, they don't come. Me, I have the
same problem. But that's OK. I'm just curious. OK,
so let's see. I've probably got you all phased a
little bit here.
One quick question. Do you remember when Gib
Gilchrist became dean? Yes. Okay, about 1935,
wasn't it? No, no, 37, 38, it doesn't matter. Let me
see.
And I can't remember who had been dean before him, I
guess is one question. It was 37 or 38. Yeah, that'd
be right, yeah. Because he left the state after the
Mall Ferguson regime, I believe, came over to A&M.
Well, he more or less retired. Yeah, from the state
service. Yeah. Highway. He had been in the highway
department, yeah. And
he was responsible for the traffic circle. there
at Northgate. Not Northgate, but where College
Avenue comes off. They put a big circle there. And
they called that Gilchrist Circle. It was a little
too small in diameter. It was hard to get around.
Get around, was it? That's still a good idea, those
circles. We really work in Europe. We don't do
that. I interviewed him when I was working that A&M
history way back when. He's an interesting man. He
was very bitter. As I remember, because he really
had a, he fought the battles. Well, he really took
care of me all the time. Yeah. He got me this summer
job with the engineering department station.
Right. And paid me for my research over there in the
privacy lab. He was good, yeah. He was all right. I
think a lot of people really think he was very good.
He was a little hard to get along with. Yeah, that's
what they said.
Did he make any changes in the program that you
remember, you know, other than, I guess,
Experiment Station? Kind of just... The reason I
ask that, in 1940, I guess it was, he's primarily
responsible, I think, for separating chemistry
and chemical engineering. Would you say that?
Well, really, he was there. No, it was more or less
automatic. Dr. Lindsay was in chemical
engineering, and we had to be inspected to be
approved, and they wouldn't approve us as
chemical engineering department. It's
accreditation. We were separated. Okay. So that
was the reason it was separated at that time. Okay,
but now I, somewhere I picked up to that Hedges
really didn't want that to happen. No, and it broke
his heart, really, for us to leave. And we moved
out, from the chemistry department in the
petroleum building. And he was very, well, he just
couldn't do anything about stopping us. He just
had to let it go. And I'm sure that the Elkhurst had
something to do with the separation, but the main
thing was that we had to. They just wouldn't
approve us, and that's when we were separated.
Now, what kind of a department head was Lindsey
when he came in? I've got a lot of stuff on. I'm going
to go over here and talk to Hugh, his son. Well, he
sort of grew to be the department
head. He came in
as a professor and acting head. He wasn't the head
of the department. See, Hedges was still the head
of the department when Lindsey came in. as a
chemical engineering professor. And so when they
separated us, they made Lindsey the acting head.
He was older. He had a little more experience. I was
not made to cut off while I'm there. But anyway, I
married with a teacher, a chemical engineering
teacher. And we got along all right. There was
another fellow that came in ahead of Lindsey.
who couldn't get along with the feds, but he was
there one year. He was from University of
Minnesota, and then he went to Iowa State and was
there for a few years and died young,
probably young. He was a specialist in just
infiltration. I can't remember his name either,
but he'll come to me some day. When, when use? split
out and became an independent department. How
many of you were in that new department? You and
Lindsey and Bishop? Bishop. Okay. Okay.
We taught all the courses. Okay. And we started
doing quite a bit
of research. And then during the war,
Kirkbride worked with Lindsey and we taught war
training courses. Kirk Bryant taught one under
A&M in Houston.
Now who was Kirk Bryant and where did he come from? I
think he was originally from Michigan, I'm not
sure, but he came to this
chemical oil refinery, a Pan-American oil
refinery, the Amoco, as assistant director of
research.
And then he came here during the war, he worked with
A. M. and Dr. Lindsay. And incidentally, Kirk
Pryde and Lindsay and a few of the others from down
there started the South Texas section of the
A-I-C-H-E. I didn't get in on it much. I did flow
with them every
time. I was one of the first members of it.
Good.
Now, Kirkbride only stayed a short time. He came up
here I think he may have stayed a full year.
He taught
and conducted some graduate research. He had one
or two graduate students and he did a lot of work on
my
gathering data on petroleum hydrocarbons. And he
wrote a book unit operations.
While he was teaching,
he wrote the book they used. Yeah, I knew he was well
regarded. And he was a very hard worker. He had a
regular night schedule. I think he took off I spent
at least four or five nights to go home for supper
and come back and work
till 12 o'clock. Then he became assistant
director of research for Mobile
Oil in Dallas. They had a big research center
there. But then they closed it out. He would have
had to come back east.